[1] While these things passed in Spain, Trebonius, Caesar's lieutenant, who
had been left to carry on the siege of Marseilles, raised terraces for two
different attacks, and approached with his towers and galleries. One of the
attacks was on the side of the port; the other, towards the mouth of the Rhone, which empties itself into the sea,
bordering upon Spain and Gaul. For Marseilles is washed by the sea on three
sides, and can be approached by land only on the fourth; of which that part
where the citadel stands, being very strong by nature, because of a deep
valley that runs before it, requires a long and difficult siege. For the
completing of these works, Trebonius drew together, from all parts of the
province, a great number of workmen and beasts of carriage; ordered wood and
osiers to be brought; and having prepared all things necessary, raised a
terrace eighty feet high.

[2] But so well was the town provided with all the requisites of war, and so
great was the multitude of machines to annoy the besiegers, that no mantles
were sufficient to withstand their violence. For they had wooden bars,
twelve feet in length, armed at the point with iron, which were shot with
such force from their balistae, that they pierced four rows of hurdles, and
entered a considerable way into the ground. To resist the violence of these
batteries, the besiegers made use of galleries, whose roofs consisted of
pieces of wood of about a foot in thickness, strongly compacted together.
Under this cover, the materials necessary for raising the terrace were
conveyed: and a tortoise, sixty feet long, every thing necessary to defend
it against fire and stones, went before, to level the ground. But in spite
of all endeavours, the greatness of the works, the height of the wall and
towers, and the multitude of machines made use of by the besieged, greatly
retarded the approaches. Besides, the mountaineers made frequent sallies,
and set fire to the towers and mount: which though our men easily sustained,
driving them back with great loss into the town, yet failed not very much to
incommode the works.

[3] In the mean time L. Nasidius, sent by Pompey to the assistance of Domitius
and the Marseillians, with a fleet of sixteen ships, some of which were
strengthened with beaks of brass, passed the straits of Sicily unknown to Curio, landed at Messana, and raised so great a terrorin
the place, that being abandoned by the senate and principal inhabitants, he
found means to carry off one of their gallies; and joining it to his own
fleets steered directly for Marseilles, having despatched a frigate
before, to apprize Domitius and the inhabitants of his coming, and press
them to hazard a second engagement with Brutus, when they should be
reinforced by his fleet.

[4] The Marseillians, after their defeat, had drawn as many old ships out of the
docks as they had lost in the engagement, and repaired and rigged them with
wondrous expedition. They were likewise well provided with rowers and
pilots; and had prepared a number of fishing barks, which they filled with
archers and engines, and strengthened with roofs, to shelter the rowers from
the enemy's darts. The fleet being equipped in this manner, the
Marseillians, animated by the prayers and tears of theirold men, matrons,
and virgins, to exert themselves in defence of their country in so pressing
a conjuncture; embarked with no less confidence and assurance, than they had
before their late defeat. For such is the weakness of the human mind, that
things dark, hidden, and unknown, always produce in us a greater degree of
confidence or terror; as happened in the present case: for the arrival of
Nasidius had filled all men with an uncommon share of hope and eagerness.
The wind springing up fair, they set sail, and rendezvoused at Tauroenta, a
castle belonging to the town, where Nasidius lay with his fleet. Here they
put their ships in order, armed themselves with courage for a second
encounter, and entering readily into all the measures proposed by Nasidius,
left to him the command of the left wing, and stationed themselves upon the
right.

[5] Brutus sailed to meet them, with his fleet considerably increased; for
besides the ships which Caesar had caused to be built at Aries, he had also joined to it six more,
taken from the Marseillians, which he had refitted and rigged since the late
action. Wherefore exhorting his men to despise an enemy, who had not been
able to resist them when entire and unvanquished, he advanced against them
full of resolution and confidence. It was easy to discern from Trebonius's
camp, and the eminences around it, what passed in the town. All the youth
that were left, the old men, the women, children, and even the guards upon
the walls, extending their hands to heaven, or repairing to the temples, and
prostrating themselves at the altars, besought the gods to grant them
victory. Nor was there a man among them who did not believe, that their
safety depended wholly on the issue of that day's action. For the choice of
their youth, and the most considerable men of their city, were all on board
the fleet: insomuch, that in case of any disaster, they had no resource
left; but should they obtain the victory, they were in hopes of preserving
their city, either by their own forces, or t the reinforcements they
expected from without.

[6] Accordingly, in the engagement, they behaved with the most determined
courage. The remembrance of what their wives and children had represented to
them at their departure served to exalt their bravery; in a full persuasion,
that this was the last opportunity they should have of exerting themselves
in defence of their country; and that if they fell in the engagement, their
fellow-citizens could not long survive them, as their fate must be the same
upon the taking of the town. Our ships being at some distance from each
other, both gave the enemy's pilots an opportunity of showing their address
in working their vessels, and flying to the assistance of their friends,
when they were laid hold on by our grappling hooks. And indeed, when it came
to a close fight, they seconded the mountaineers with wonderful resolution,
and, in bravery, seemed to yield but little to our men. At the same time, a
great quantity of darts, poured incessantly from their smaller frigates,
wounded a great many of our rowers, and such of the soldiers as were without
shelter. Two of their galleys fell upon that of Brutus, which was easily
distinguished by its flag; but though they attacked him on both sides, he
extricated himself with such agility and address, as in a short time to get
a little before; which made them run foul of each other so violently, that
they were both considerably shattered; one in particular had its beak
broken, and was in a manner totally crushed; which being observed by those
of our fleet that lay nearest, they suddenly fell upon and sunk them, before
they could recover out of their disorder.

[7] In this encounter, the ships under Nasidius were of no manner of service to
the Marseillians, but quickly retired out of the fight. For as they were
neither animated by the sight of their country, nor the entreaties of their
relations, they were not very forward to expose their lives to hazard, but
escaped without hurt from the combat. The Marseillians had five ships sunk,
and four taken. One escaped to the coast of hither Spain, with those of Nasidius. Of the rest
that remained, one was immediately despatched to Marseilles, to carry thither the news of
the defeat. As soon as it drew near the town, all the inhabitants flocked
out to know what had passed; and being informed of it, appeared no less
dejected, than if the city had been taken by storm. However, they still
continued their preparations for the defence of the place with as much
diligence as ever.

[8] The legionaries, who had the charge of tower of brick, built at a little
distance from the walls, would be of great service to shelter them from the
frequent sallies of the enemy. At first they made it very low and small, to
guard against sudden incursions. Hither they retired in case of danger: here
they defended themselves against the most obstinate attacks of the enemy;
nay, even assaulted them in their turn, repulsed, and pursued them. This
tower was of a square form, thirty feet every way, allowing for the
thickness of the walls, which might be about five feet. Afterwards, (being
instructed by experience, which is the best of teachers,) they plainly
perceived, that the higher it was carried, the more serviceable it would
prove. The manner of effecting it was thus:

[9] When the work was raised to the height of one story, they laid a floor over
it, the extremities of whose beams were concealed in the thickness of the
wall; that they might not by appearing on the outside, be liable to be set
on fire. Thence they continued the wall directly upwards, as far as their
galleries and mantles would allow. Here they laid two beams crosswise, whose
extremities almost reached the angles of the wall, for supporting the floor,
which was to serve as a roof to the whole. Over these beams they laid the
joists of the roof, and boarded them with planks. The roof was so contrived
as to project a little beyond the wall, in order to suspend from it what
might be necessary to shelter the workmen, while employed in completing the
story. This floor was paved with tiles and clay, to render it proof against
fire, and had besides a covering of strong mattresses, to break the force of
stones and darts. At the same time they suspended from the beams of the
roof, that projected beyond the wall, curtains made of strong cables, woven
to the depth of four feet, and which went round the three sides of the tower
that were exposed to the engines of the enemy; having experienced on former
occasions, that this kind of cover was impenetrable to any dart or engine
whatever. When this part of the tower was finished, roofed, and sheltered
from the enemy's blows, they removed their mantles to another, and by means
of engines elevated the roof entire from the first story, as far as the
curtains would allow. There, secure from all insult, they laboured at the
wall, elevating the roof a second time, and thereby enabling themselves both
to continue the work, and lay the interjacent floors. In this manner they
proceeded from story to story, mounting them one upon another, till without
danger or wounds, they had completed the number of six, leaving loop-holes
in convenient places, for the engines to play through.

[10] When, by means of this tower, they thought they had sufficiently provided for
the security of the works around it, they resolved to build a gallery sixty
feet long, of wood, two feet in thickness, to extend from the brick tower to
the tower of the enemy, and the very walls of the town. The form of the
gallery was this: First, two beams of equal length were laid upon the
ground, at the distance of four feet from one another; and in these were
fixed little pillars five feet high, joined at the top by beams designed to
suppirt the roof of the gallery. Over these were laid rafters, two feet
square, fastened strongly with nails and plates of iron. The upper part of
the roof was composed of square laths, four inches thick, which were placed
at a small distance one from another, to bear the tiles that were to be laid
upon them. Thus was the whole finished with a sloping roof, which being
partly composed of tiles and mortar, was proof against fire, and had besides
a covering of hides, to hinder the mortar from being washed away by spouts
of water. Over all we threw strong mattresses, to screen the hides from fire
and stones. This work was finished close by the brick tower, under cover of
four mantles, and immediately carried forward upon rollers, in the manner
ships are launched, till it unexpectedly reached the very tower of the
enemy.

[11] The Marseillians astonished at so threatening and unlooked-for a machine,
pushed forward with levers the largest stones they could find, and tumbled
them from the top of the wall upon the gallery. But the strength of the wood
resisted the violence of their blows, so that they fell to the ground
without doing any hurt. Observing this, they changed their design, and
poured down upon us burning barrels of pitch and tallow. But these likewise
rolled along the roof without damage, and falling upon the ground, were
afterwards thrust away with forks and long poles. Meanwhile our soldiers,
under protection of the gallery, were endeavouring with their levers to
undermine the enemy's tower. The gallery itself was defended by tne tower of
brick whence our engines played without intermission insomuch that the
enemy, driven from their tower and walls, were at last obliged to abandon
their defence. By degrees the tower being undermined, part of it fell down,
and the rest was so shaken that it could not stand long. 
Upon this the enemy, alarmed at so unexpected a misfortune, discouraged by
the downfall of the tower, awed by such a testimony of the wrath of the
gods, and dreading the plunder and devastation of their city, came forth in
the habit of suppliants, and with outstretched hands, besought the
compassion of the army and generals.

[12] At this new and unexpected sight, all acts of hostility ceased, and the
soldiers, laying aside their ardour for the fight, were eager to hear and
get acquainted with the proposals of the enemy, who arriving ib presence of
the army and generals, threw themselves at their feet, requesting them to
suspend all further operations till Caesar's arrival. They told them: "That
as the works were now completed, and the tower destroyed, they were sensible
the city could no longer hold out, and therefore meant not to defend it:
that in the mean time, no prejudice could arise to the besiegers from this
respite, because, if they refused to submit upon Caesar's coming, he would
have it in his power to treat them as he pleased. They added, that if the
whole tower should be brought down, it would be impossible to hinder the
soldiers from yielding to the desire of plunder, by breaking into and
pillaging the town." This, and much more of the same nature (for the
Marseillians are a learned people), they urged in a very moving and pathetic
strain.

[13] The generals, moved by these monstrances, drew off the soldiers from the
works, discontinued the attack, and contented themselves with posting guards
in convenient places. Compassion occasioned a kind of truce till Caesar's
arrival; so that on neither side were any acts of hostility committed, but
every thing was quiet and secure, as if the siege had beenl= at an end. For
Caesar had earnestly recommended it to Trebonius, by letter, to prevent, if
possible, the city's being taken by storm, lest the soldiers, irritated by
their revolt, and the resistance they had found, should put all the youth to
the sword, as they threatened to do. Nay, they were even then hardly
restrained from breaking into the town, and loudly murmured against
Trebonius for delaying a conquest which they looked upon as certain.

[14] But the Marseillians, a nation without faith, aimed at nothing further in all
this, than to find a time and opportunity to deceive us, and put in practice
the treacherous purpose they had formed. For after some days, our men
suspecting no danger, but relying upon the good faith of the enemy, while
some were retired to their tents, others laid down, to rest in the trenches,
overpowered by the long fatigue they had undergone, and all the arms laid up
and removed out of sight, suddenly they sallied from the town, and the wind
being high, and favourable to their design, set fire to the works. The flame
in a moment spread itself on all sides, insomuch that the battery, the
mantles, the tortoise, the tower, the machines, and the gallery were
entirely destroyed, before it was possible to discover whence the disaster
arose. The suddenness of the accident made our men immediately run to their
arms, where every one took what came first to hand. Some sallied out upon
the enemy, but were checked by the arrows and darts poured upon them from
the town; insomuch that the Marseillians, sheltered by their walls, burnt
without any difficulty the tower of brick and the gallery. Thus the labour
of many months was destroyed in an instant, by the treachery of an enemy,
and the violence of the wind. Next day they made the same attempt, favoured
by the same wind, and with yet greater assurance, against the tower and
terrace of the other attack. They approached them boldly, and threw plenty
of fire upon them; but our men, grown wise by their late misfortune, had
made all necessary preparations for their defence, so that after losing many
men, they were obliged to retreat into the city, without effecting their
purpose.

[15] Trebonius immediately resolved to repair his loss, in which he found himself
warmly seconded by the zeal of the soldiers. They saw the works, which had
cost so much labour and toil, destroyed by the perfidy of a people, who made
no scruple of violating the most sacred engagements: they saw that their
credulity had been abused, and that they were become the jest of their
enemies, which grieved and provoked them at the same time. But it was still
difficult to determine whence they might be supplied with wood, to repair
all these works. There was none in the neighbourhood of Marseilles, the trees having been all cut
down for a great way round. They resolved therefore to raise a terrace of a
new kind, and such as history no where mentions before that time. They
raised two walls of brick, each six feet thick, and distant from one
another, nearly the breadth of the former mount. Over these they laid a
floor, and to render it firm, besides its being supported on either side,
placed pillars underneath between the walls, to bear it up where it was
weakest, or had a greater stress of weight to support. There were moreover
cross beams, which rested upon niches in the wall; and to render the several
floors proof against fire, hurdles were laid over them, which were
afterwards covered with clay. The soldiers, thus sheltered over head by the
roof, on the right and left by walls, and before by a breast-work, brought
the necessary materials without danger, and by the eagerness with which they
laboured, soon completed the whole, leaving overtures in convenient places
to sally out upon occasion.

[16] The enemy seeing we had repaired, in so short a time, what they imagined must
have cost us the labour of many days; that there was now no hope left,
either of deceiving us, or sallying out upon us with success; that all the
approaches to the city by land, might in like manner be shut up by a wall
and towers, so as to render it impossible for them to appear upon their
works, our walls overtopping and commanding theirs, that they could neither
discharge their javelins, nor make any use of their engines, in which their
principal hope lay; and that they were now reduced to the necessity of
fighting us upon equal terms, though conscious of their great inferiority in
point of valour; they were forced to have recourse again to the same
conditions of truce they had so ill observed before.

[17] M. Varro, in farther Spain, having early notice of what passed
in Italy, and beginning to distrust the
success of Pompey's affairs, spoke in a very friendly manner to `Caesar. He
said, "That he was indeed under particular obligations to Pompey, who had
made him his lieutenant-general, but at the same time was no less indebted
to Caesar: that he was not ignorant of the duty of a lieutenant, employed by
his general in an office of trust; but that he likewise knew his own
strength, and the attachment of the whole province to Caesar." After this
manner he talked in all companies, nor declared expressly for either side.
But when he afterwards understood, that Caesar was detained by the siege of Marseilles; that the armies of Petreius
and Afranius had joined, and daily grew stronger by the arrival of new
succours; that there was room to hope for every thing; that the hither
province had unanimously declared in their favour; that Caesar himself was
reduced to great straits at Lerida, of all which Afranius wrote
largely, magnifying his own advantages, he began to alter with fortune.

[18] He raised troops over the whole province; added thirty auxiliary cohorts to
the two legions he had already under his command; formed great magazines of
corn to supply Marseilles, and the armies under Afranius
and Petreius; ordered the Gaditani to furnish him with ten ships of war;
caused a considerable number to be built at Hispalis; sent all the money and ornaments
he found in the temple of Hercules to Cales; left there a garrison of six
cohorts, under the command of Caius Gallonius, a Roman knight, the friend of
Domitius, who had sent him thither to look after an inheritance of his;
conveyed all the arms, public and private, to Gallonius's house; spoke every
where disadvantageously of Caesar; declared several times from his tribunal,
that Caesar had been worsted, and that many of his soldiers had gone over to
Afranius, as he was well assured by undoubted testimonies: by all which,
having struck a terror into the Roman citizens of that province, he obliged
them to promise him one hundred and ninety thousand sesterces, twenty
thousand weight of silver, and one hundred and twenty thousand bushels of
wheat. The states well affected to Caesar he loaded with heavy
contributions; confiscated the effects of such as had spoken against the
commonwealth; quartered soldiers upon them; harassed them with arbitrary
judgments; and in fine, obliged the whole province to take an oath of
fidelity to himself and Pompey. Hearing of what had passed in hither Spain, he prepared for war. His design
was, to shut himself up with his two legions in Cales, where all the provisions and
shipping lay, because he very well understood, that the whole province was
in Caesar's interest, for he judged it would be easy in that island, with
the ships and provisions he had to draw out the war into length. 
Caesar, though called upon by many and necessary affairs to return to Italy, resolved, however, not to leave Spain, till he had entirely quelled the
war in that province; for he knew that hither Spain had many obligations to Pompey, and
that most of the inhabitants were strongly in his interest.

[19] Having therefore detached two legions into farther Spain, under the command of Q. Cassius,
tribune of the people, he himself advanced, by great journeys, at the head
of six hundred horse. He sent orders before to the magistrates, and the
principal men of every state, to meet him by a certain day at Cordova. All obeyed; every state sent his
deputies; nor was there a single Roman citizen of any consideration, who did
not repair thither on this occasion, The very senate of Cordova, of their own proper motion, shut
their gates against Varro, stationed guards and sentinels along the walls,
and detained two cohorts, called Calonicae, which chanced to march that way,
that they might serve to protect the town. At the same time those of Carmona, the most considerable state in
the province, drove out of their city three cohorts, which Varro had left to
garrison the citadel, and shut their gates against them.

[20] This determined Varro to make all possible despatch, that he might reach Cales, as soon as possible, lest his
march should be intercepted; so great and apparent was the affection of the
province to Caesar. When he was advanced a little way, he received letters
from Cales, which informed him, "That as soon
as Caesar's edict was known, the principal men of Cales, with the tribunes of the cohorts
he had left in garrison, had conspired to drive Gallonius from the city, and
preserve the town and island for Caesar; that this project being formed,
they had warned Gallonius to retire of his own accord, while he yet might
with safety; threatening, if he did not, to come to some immediate
resolution against him: that Gallonius, terrified by so general a revolt,
had accordingly left Cales." Upon this intelligence, one of
the two legions, known by the name of Vernacula, took up their ensigns in
Varro's presence, quitted the camp, and marched directly to Hispalis, where they sat down in the
market-place and cloisters, without committing the least act of violence,
which so wrought upon the Roman citizens residing in the town, that every
one houses. Varro, astonished at these proceedings, turned back with design
to reach Italica, but was informed that the gates
were shut. At last, finding himself surrounded on all sides, and the ways
every where beset, he wrote to Caesar that he was ready to resign the legion
under his command, to whomsoever he should order to receive it. Caesar sent
Sextus Caesar to take the command; and Varro, having resigned the legion
accordingly, came to him at Cordova. After giving him an account of
the state of the province, he faithfully resigned all the public money he
had in his hands, and informed him of the quantity of corn and shipping he
had prepared.

[21] Caesar, assembling the states at Cordova, returned thanks severally to all
who had declared in his favour; to the Roman citizens, for having made
themselves masters of the town in his name; to the Spaniards, for driving
out Pompey's garrisons: to the people of Cales, for having frustrated the designs
of his enemies, and asserted their own liberty; to the military tribunes and
centuriens sent thither to guard the place, for having confirmed them in
their resolutions by their example. He remitted the tribute imposed by Varro
upon the Roman citizens; restored their estates to those who had been
deprived of them for speaking their thoughts freely; distributed rewards to
a great many, both in public and private, and gave all room to hope for like
favours in the issue. After a stay of two days at Cordova, he went to Cales, where he restored to the temple
of Hercules all the treasures and ornaments which had been carried off, and
lodged in private houses. He committed the government of the province to Q.
Cassius, assigned him four legions for that purpose; and embarking for Tarraco on board the fleet which Varro had
obliged the Gaditani to furnish, arrived there in a few days. There he found
deputies from almost all the states of the province, and having, in like
manner as at Cordova, both publicly and privately
rewarded some states; he left Tarraco came by land to Narbonne, and thence to Marseilles. There he was informed of the
law touching the dictatorship, and that M. Lepidus the pretor had named him
to that office.

[22] The Marseillians, overwhelmed with profusion of calamities, reduced to the
utmost distress by famine, worsted in two different engagements by sea,
weakened by continual sallies, assaulted by a heavy pestilence, occasioned
by the length of the siege, and their constant change of diet (for they were
obliged to feed upon old meal and musty barley, which had been long
treasured up in their magazines against an accident of this kind), their
tower being overthrown, a great part of their walls undermined, and no
prospect of relief from armies or the provinces, which were now all reduced
under Caesar's power, they resolved to surrender in good earnest. But some
days before, Domitius, who was apprized of their intentions, having prepared
three ships (two of which he assigned to his followers, and embarked in
person on board the third), took occasion, during a storm, to make his
escape. Some of Brutus's galleys, which he had ordered to keep constantly
cruising before the port, chancing to get sight of him, prepared to give
chace. That in which Domitius was, escaped under favour of the tempest; but
the two others, alarmed at seeing our galleys so near them, re-entered the
port. Caesar spared the town, more in regard to its antiquity and
reputation, than any real merit it could plead. He obliged the citizens
however to deliver up their arms, machines, and ships of war, whether in the
port or arsenal; to surrender all the money in their treasury; and to
receive a garrison of two legions. Then sending the rest of the army into Italy, he himself set out for Rome.

[23] About the same time, C. Curio sailed from Sicily into Africa, with two of the four legions which
had been put under his command by Caesar, and five hundred horse; having
conceived the highest contempt of the troops headed by P. Attius Varus.
After two days and three nights sailing, he landed at a place called
Aquilaria. This place is about twenty-two miles distant from Clupea, and has
a very convenient harbour for ships in the summer time, sheltered on each
side by a promontory. L. Caesar, the son, waited for him at Clupea, with ten
galleys, which P. Attius had taken in the war against the pirates, and
repaired at Utica, for the service of the present war.
But terrified at the number of ships Curio brought with him, he stood in for
the coast; where, running his galley on shore, he left her, and went by land
to Adrumetum. C. Confidius Longus commanded in that town, with one legion:
and here also the rest of the fleet repaired after Caesar's flight. M. Rufus
the questor pursuing them, with twelve galleys, which Curio had brought with
him from Africa, to guard the transports; when he
saw Caesar's own galley upon the strand, he towed her off, and returned with
the fleet to Curio.

[24] Curio ordered him to sail directly for Utica, and followed himself with the land
army. After a march of two days, he arrived at the river Bagradas, where he
left C. Caninius Rebilus with the legions, and advanced before with the
cavalry, to take a view of the Cornelian camp, which was judged to be a
situation extremely advantageous. It is a high rock, jutting out into the
sea, steep and rough on both sides, but with an easier descent where it
fronts Utica. It lies little more than a mile
from Utica in a direct line; but as there is a
fountain about half way, which runs towards the sea, and overflowing the
plain, forms a morass; to avoid this, in marching to Utica, it is necessary to take a compass
of six miles.

[25] When he had taken a view of this post, he went next and examined Varus's
camp, which was under the walls of the town, towards the gate named the Gate
of War. The situation of it was extremely advantageous; for on the one side
it was covered by the city of Utica itself, and on the other by a kind
of theatre, which stood without the walls, the works round which took up so
much room, that they rendered the approach to the camp extremely difficult.
At the same time he saw all the ways crowded with people, who, out of fear
of being pillaged, were carrying their most valuable effects into the city.
He detached the cavalry against them to disperse them, and likewise have an
opportunity of making some booty. Upon which, Varus ordered six hundred
Numidian horse to advance to their assistance, which he further strengthened
with four hundred foot, sent by Juba, a few days before, to reinforce the
garrison of Utica. This king inherited from his father
an affection for Pompey, and besides personally hated Curio; who, during his
tribuneship had published a law to deprive him of his kingdom. The Numidian
cavalry soon came to blows with ours; but were not able to stand their first
charge, retreating to their camp, with the loss of a hundred and twenty men.
Meantime, upon the arrival of Curio's fleet he ordered proclamation to be
made among the merchant ships, which were at Utica, to the number of two hundred, that
he would treat them as enemies, if they did not immediately repair to the
Cornelian camp. Upon this proclamation, they instantly weighed anchor, and
leaving Utica, sailed whither they were ordered;
by which means the army was plentifully supplied with every thing they stood
in need of.

[26] These things despatched, Curio repaired to his camp at Bagrada, where, with
the joint acclamations of the whole army, he was saluted by the name of
Imperator. Next day he led his army towards Utica, and encamped not far from the town.
But before he had finished his entrenchments, he was informed by some
parties of horse, who were upon the scout, that a powerful body of horse and
foot had been sent by the king of Utica: at the same time a great cloud of
dust began to appear, and soon after the enemy's van was in view. Curio,
astonished at a motion so unexpected, sent the cavalry before to sustain
their first charge, and keep them in play: he, meanwhile, drawing off the
legions from the works, with all possible expedition, formed them in order
of battle. The horse engaged according to orders; and with such success,
that before the legions could be duly drawn up, the whole reinforcement sent
by the king, who marched without order or apprehension of danger, falling
into confusion, at last betook themselves to flight. The cavalry, wheeling
nimbly along the shore, escaped, with little loss, into the town; but great
numbers of the infantry were cut to pieces.

[27] Next night, two centurions of the nation of the Marsi, with twenty-two
private soldiers, deserted from Curio, and went over to Attius Varus. These,
either believing the thing themselves, or desirous to carry grateful tidings
to Varus (for we easily believe what we wish, and readily hope that others
will fall into our way of thinking), assured him, that the whole army was
extremely averse to Curio, and would infallibly revolt, if he would but
advance, and come to a conference with them, Accordingly Varus drew out his
legions next day. Curio did the same; and the two armies stood facing one
another in order of battle, with a small valley between them.

[28] Sextus Quintilius Varus, who, as we have related above, had been made
prisoner at Corfinium, was now in the enemy's
army: for Caesar having granted him his liberty, he had retired into Africa. Curio had brought over with him
from Sicily the very same legions, who had
revolted some time before to Caesar at the siege of Corfinium: so that excepting a few
centurions who had been changed, the officers and companies were the same as
had formerly served with this very Quintilius. He made use of this handle to
debauch the army of Curio; "and began with putting the soldiers in mind of
their former oath to Domitius, and to himself, that general's questor; he
exhorted them not to carry arms against the old companions of their fortune,
who had shared with them in all the hazards of that siege; nor fight in
defence of that party, who treated them ignominiously, and as deserters." To
these considerations, he added offers of a liberal recompense, if they would
follow his fortune and that of Attius. But his speech made no impression
upon Curio's troops, so that both armies retired to their respective camps.

[29] But an uncommon panic soon spread itself over Curio's camp, which the various
discourses of the soldiers served only to increase. For every one had his
opinion, and added the suggestions of his own fear to that which he heard
from others. These reports spreading from one to many, and receiving
additions in every new relation, there appeared to be several authors of the
same notions "That in a civil war it was lawful for every soldier to choose
what side he pleased; that the same legion, who a little before had fought
on the side of the enemy, might, without scruple, return again to the same
cause, since Caesar's conferring favours upon his enemies, ought not to
render them unmindful of prior and greater obligations: that even the
municipal towns were divided in their affection, and sided some with one
party, some with another." These discourses proceeded not from the Marsi and
Peligni alone, but ran like a torrent through the whole camp. However, some
of the soldiers blamed their companions for this so great freedom of talk
and others, who affected to appear more diligent than the rest, enlarged in
their accounts of it to the officers.

[30] For these reasons,Curio summoning a council of war, began to deliberate were
for attacking, at all hazards, the camp of Varus, in order to find
employment for the soldiers, whose idleness they considered as the cause of
all the present alarms. Besides, it was better, they said, to trust to
valour, and try the fortune of a battle, than see themselves abandoned by
their men, and delivered up to the barbarity of the enemy. Others were for
retiring, during the night, to the Cornelian camp, where they would have
more time to cure the infatuation of the soldiers; and whence, in case of a
disaster, they could, with more safety and ease, make good their retreat
into Sicily, by means of the great number of
ships they were there provided with.

[31] Curio relished neither of these notions: the one, he thought, argued
cowardice; the other, a rash boldness: to retreat, would have all the
appearance of a shameful flight; to attack, they must resolve to fight in a
place of disadvantage. "With what hope," said he, "can we attack a camp
fortified by nature and art? And what advantage can we draw from an attempt,
whence we shall be obliged to retire with loss ? Does not success always
secure to a general the affection of his troops, whereas ill fortune is
evermore followed with contempt ? And what would a decampment imply but an
ignominious flight, an absolute despair of all things, and an unavoidable
alienation of the whole army? That we ought not to let the modest think we
distrust them, nor the insolent that we fear them; because the knowledge of
our fear only augments the presumption of the one, and an apprehension of
being suspected, abates the zeal of the other. But if what is reported of
the discontent of the army be true, which I am yet unwilling to believe, at
least to the degree some pretend; we ought, for that reason, rather to hide
and dissemble our fears, than by an unreasonable discovery of them, to add
strength to the evil: that, as in some cases, it was necessary to conceal
the wounds of the body, that the enemy might not conceive hope from our
misfortunes; so also ought we to hide the indisposition of an army: that by
retreating in the night, as some proposed, they would only furnish a fairer
occasion to the ill-affected to execute their purpose: for fear and shame
are powerful restraints by day, but night entirely divests them of their
force: that he was neither so rash, as to attack a camp without hopes of
success; nor so blinded by fear, as to be at a loss what measures to pursue:
that he thought it his duty to examine things to the bottom; and as he had
called them together to deliberate upon the present state of affairs,
doubted not, with their assistance, to take such measures as would be
attended with success."

[32] He then dismissed the council; and assembling the soldiers, put them in mind
of what advantage their steadiness and zeal had been to Caesar at Corfinium, and how serviceable
towards the conquest of the greatest part of Italy. " It was you," said he, "that gave
the example, and all the municipal towns soon followed: their submission to
Caesar was your work; and therefore it is not without reason, that he is so
particularly attached to you, and that Pompey hates you sincerely. It was
you that obliged him to quit Italy, without being forced to it by the
loss of a battle. Caesar, who ranks me in the number of his dearest friends,
has committed my safety to your care, with Sicily and Africa, without which it would be
impossible to defend either Rome or Italy. You are now in the presence of
those who exhort you to abandon us: and indeed what could be more desirable
to them, than at the same time to ensnare us, and fix upon you the stain of
an infinite crime? What worse opinion could an enraged enemy testify of you,
than to suppose you capable of betraying those, who own themselves indebted
to you for all; and of throwing yourselves into the power of a party, who
consider you as the authors of all their misfortunes? Are you strangers to
Caesar's exploits in Spain? Two armies defeated! Two generals
overcome! Two provinces brought under subjection! And all this in the space
of forty days, is it likely that those, who, with forces unbroken, could not
stand their ground, will be able to resist, now they are vanquished? And
will you who followed Caesar before fortune declared in his favour, now
return to the vanquished, when fortune has already decided the quarrel, and
you are upon the point of obtaining the reward of your services? They charge
you with having abandoned and betrayed them, contrary to the faith of oaths.
But is it indeed true, that you abandoned Domitius? Or did he not rather
meanly abandon you, at a time when you were ready to suffer every thing for
his sake? Did he not, unknown to you, resolve to seek his safety in flight?
And were you not, after being thus basely betrayed by him, indebted to
Caesar's goodness for your preservation? How could your oath bind you to
one, who, after throwing away the ensigns of his authority, and divesting
himself of his office, surrendered himself a private man and a captive into
the power of another? The new engagement you were then brought under alone
subsists at present, and ought quite to obliterate that, which the surrender
of your general, and his loss of liberty, have made void. But though I doubt
not of your being satisfied with Caesar, you may perhaps have taken offence
at me. And, indeed, I have no thought of mentioning any services I may have
done you: which, as yet, come far short of my intentions, and your
expectations: but you are not ignorant, that the rewards of military service
come not till after the conclusion of the war; and I believe you little
doubt what the issue of this will be. Nor need I, on this occasion, decline
taking notice of the diligence I have used, the progress already made, and
the good fortune that has hitherto attended me. Are you dissatisfied that I
have landed my army safe in Africa, without the loss of a single ship
? That I dispersed the enemy's fleet at the first onset ? That within the
space of two days I have twice defeated their cavalry? That I forced two
hundred of their merchantmen to quit the port of Utica and join me? And that I have reduced
them to a situation where it is impossible for them to receive any supplies
either by land or sea? Can you think of abandoning a cause conducted by such
leaders, and attended with such success; to followthe fortune of those who
so ignominiously delivered up Corfinium, relinquished Italy, surrendered Spain, and have already sustained
considerable losses in the African war? I never pretended to more than being
a follower of Caesar: it was you that honoured me with the title of
Imperator, which I am ready this moment to resign, if you think me unworthy
of the favour. Restore me my former name, that it may not be said I was
honoured, to be covered afterwards with the greater ignominy."

[33] These remonstrances made such an impression upon the soldiers, that they
frequently interrupted him while he was speaking, and appeared deeply
touched at his suspecting their fidelity. As he retired, they all gathered
round him, exhorting him not to be discouraged, or scruple to hazard a
battle, and make trial of their fidelity and bravery. This behaviour of the
troops wrought so great a change in the minds of the officers, that Curio,
with the joint concurrence of them all, resolved to give battle the first
opportunity that offered. Accordingly, drawing out his men next day, in the
same place he had done for some time past, he ranged them in order of
battle. Attius Varus did the same; that if an opportunity offered, either of
corrupting the soldiers, or fighting to advantage, he might be in readiness
to lay hold of it.

[34] Between the two armies lay a valley, as we have observed above, not indeed
considerable for its breadth, but steep and difficult of ascent. Both
sideswaited till the other should pass it, that they might engage to more
advantage. Curio observing that all the horse on Varus's right wing,
together with the lightarmed foot, had ventured down into this valley,
detached his cavalry against them, with two cohorts of Marrucinians; whose
first shock the enemy were not able to sustain, but returned full speed to
their own men, leaving the light-armed foot behind, who were surrounded and
cut to pieces in the sight of Varus's army; which, fronting that way, was
witness to the flight of the one, and the slaughter of the other. Upon this
Rebilus, one of Caesar's lieutenants, whom Curio had brought with him from Sicily, on account of his consummate
knowledge in the art of war; "Why," says he, "do you delay seizing the
favourable moment? You see the enemy struck with terror." Curio made no
answer, only desired his soldiers to remember what they had promised the day
before, and marching the first, commanded them to follow him. The valley was
so steep and difficult, that the first ranks could not ascend, but with the
assistance of those that came after. But the Attinian army was so dispirited
with fear, and the flight and slaughter of their troops, that they never
thought of making resistance, fancying themselves already surrounded by our
cavalry; so that before we could arrive within reach of the dart, the whole
army of Varus fled and retreated to their camp.

[35] In this flight, one Fabius Pelignus, a centurion of the lowest rank in
Curio's army, as he was pursuing the fugitives, called with a loud voice to
Varus as if he had been one of his own men, who wanted to admonish him of
something. Varus hearing himself named several times, turned and stood
still, demanding who he was, and what he wanted. Fabius would certainly have
killed him, had not Varus warded it off with his shield. Fabius himself was
soon after surrounded and slain. Meanwhile, the multitude of fugitives so
closed up the gates of the camp, and pressed upon one another in such a
manner, that more were crowded to death, than fell either in the battle or
pursuit. Nay, the camp itself was very near being taken; because great
numbers, instead of stopping there to defend it, made directly for the town.
But both the nature of the ground, and the fortifications themselves,
prevented the assault; and the rather, as Curio's soldiers being armed only
for battle, had brought with them none of the necessary tools to force a
camp. Curio brought back his army without the loss of a man, Fabius
excepted. Of the enemy, about six hundred were killed, and a thousand
wounded. After Curio had drawn off his men, all the wounded quitted the
camp, and retired into the city, as did a great many others, who, overcome
by fear, sheltered themselves there also under the same pretence. Varus
observing this, and that a universal dread had seized the army, left only a
trumpet in the camp, with a few tents for show, and, about midnight,
silently entered the town with all his forces.

[36] Next day Curio resolved to besiege Utica, and draw a line ofcircumvallation
round it. There was in the town a multitude of men unfit for the fatigues of
war, through a long enjoyment of peace. The inhabitants themselves were
strongly attached to Caesar, for ancient favours received from him. The
senate was composed of people greatly differing in their tempers, and the
losses already sustained spread terror through all ranks. A surrender was
publicly talked of, and all concurred in soliciting Varus not to ruin them
by his obstinacy and perverseness. While these things were in agitation,
messengers sent by king Juba arrived, who informed them of the
approach of his army, and exhorted them to defend the city; which
contributed not a little to confirm their wavering minds.

[37] Curio received the same news, but for some time would not believe it, so
greatly did he confide in his good fortune. Besides, Caesar's success in Spain was already known in Africa; whence he concluded it improbable
that Juba would attempt any thing against him.
But when he was for certain informed with his whole army, he retired from
before the town to the Cornelian camp, laid in great quantities of corn and
wood, began to fortify himself, and sent directly to Sicily for the cavalry, and the two
legions he had left there. The camp itself was very advantageous for
protracting the war, being strong both by nature and art, near the sea, and
abounding in water and salt, great quantities of which had been carried
thither from the neighbouring saltpits. Neither ran he any hazard of being
straitened for wood and corn, as the country abounded in trees and grain. He
resolved, therefore, with the consent of the whole army, to wait here the
arrival of the rest of the troops, and make preparation for continuing the
war.

[38] This resolution being taken, and meeting with general approbation, some of
the townsmen, who had deserted to Curio, informed him, that the war in which Juba was engaged with the Leptitani,
having obliged him to return into his own kingdom, he had only sent his
lieutenant Sabura, with a small body of forces, to the assistance of the
Uticans. Upon this intelligence, to which he too hastily gave credit, he
changed his design, and resolved to give battle. The fire of youth, his
courage, good success, and self-confidence, contributed greatly to confirm
him in this resolution. Urged by these considerations, about the beginning
of the night, he sent all his cavalry towards the enemy's camp, which was
upon the river Bagradas, and where Sabura, of whom we have spoken before,
commanded in chief. But the king followed with all his forces, and was not
above six miles behind him. The cavalry which Curio had detached, marched
all night, and coming unexpectedly upon the enemy, attacked them before they
were ready to receive the charge: for the Numidians, according to the custom
of that barbarous country, were encamped without order or rule. Falling upon
them therefore, in this confusion, and oppressed with sleep, they slew great
numbers, and obliged the rest to fly in the utmost consternation; after
which they returned to Curio with the prisoners they had taken.

[39] Curio had set out with all his forces about the fourth watch of the night,
leaving only five cohorts to guard his camp. After a march of six miles he
was met by his cavalry, who informed him of all that had passed. He asked
the prisoners, who commanded at Bagradas? They answered, Sabura. Upon this,
without making any further inquiries, for fear of being detained too long,
he turned to the troops next to him, and said, "Do you not see,
fellow-soldiers, that the report of the prisoners corresponds exactly with
the intelligence given by the deserters? Juba is not with the army. It must consist
of but a few troops, since they were not able to withstand the charge of a
small body of horse. Haste, therefore, in the pursuit of glory, booty, and
victory. " What the cavalry had done was indeed considerable, because they
were but few in number in comparison of the Numidians; but as vanity always
makes us believe our merit to be greater than it is, they themselves boasted
immoderately of the action, and endeavoured to enhance the value of it. They
made a mighty parade of the booty. The prisoners too, as well infantry as
cavalry, marched in procession before them. And indeed the whole army
imagined, that to delay the battle, was no other than to delay the victory;
so that the ardour of the troops perfectly seconded Curio's hopes. He
therefore hastened his march, ordering the horse to follow, that he might as
soon as possible come up with the frighted enemy. But as they were fatigued
with their late march, they found themselves unable to keep pace with the
army; but stopped, some in one place, some in another; which, however,
retarded not Curio's hopes.

[40] Juba having notice from Sabura of the
action in the night, detached to his assistance two thousand Spanish and
Gallic horse, of his ordinary guard, with that part of the infantry in which
he put the greatest confidence. Himself followed leisurely with the rest of
the troops, and about forty elephants, suspecting that Curio, who had sent
the cavalry before, could not be far off with his army. Sabura drew up his
horse and foot, ordering them to give ground upon the enemy's attack, and,
as through fear, counterfeit a flight. Meanwhile he told them, that he would
give the signal of battle when he saw proper, and direct their motions as
the case might require. 
Curio, flattered with new hopes, and imagining, by the enemy's motions, that
they were preparing for flight, made his troops come down from the mountain
into the plain;

[41] and advancing still farther, though his army was already very much fatigued,
halted at last to give the men breath. That moment Sabura sounded the
charge, led on his men in order of battle, and went from rank to rank to
animate the troops; but he suffered only the cavalry to come to blows,
keeping the infantry at a distance within sight. Curio was not wanting on
his side, but exhorted his men to place all their hopes in their valour. And
indeed neither the infantry, though fatigued with their march, nor the
cavalry, though few in number, and spent with toil, showed any want of
valour, or backwardness to fight; though the last in particular did not
exceed two hundred, the rest having stopped by the way. These, wherever they
attacked the enemy, obliged them to give ground, but they could neither
pursue far, nor drive their horses on with impetuosity, On the other hand,
the Numidian cavalry began to surround our men, and charge them in the rear.
When the cohorts advanced against them, they fell back, and by the quickness
of their retreat, eluded the charge, but immediately returning, they got
behind our men, and cut them off from the rest of the army. Thus it was
equally dangerous for them to maintain their ranks, or advance to battle.
The enemy's forces increased continually, by the reinforcements sent from
the king; ours, on the contrary, were disabled by fatigue. Neither could our
wounded men retire, or be sent to any place of safety, the whole army being
invested by the enemy's horse. These despairing of safety, as is usual for
men in the last moments of life, either lamented their own fate, or
recommended their relations to their fellow-soldiers, if any should be so
fortunate as to escape that danger. The whole army was filled with
consternation and grief.

[42] Curio perceiving the general alarm, and that neither his exhortations nor
prayers were regarded, ordered the troops to retire with the standards to
the nearest mountains, as the only resource in the present exigence. But the
cavalry detached by Sabura had already seized them. All hope being now lost,
some were slain while endeavouring to fly; others threw themselves upon the
ground, partly in despair, partly unable to make any efforts for their own
safety. At this moment, Cn. Domitius, who commanded the horse, addressing
Curio, encavalry that remained, promising not to abandon him. "Can I," says
Curio, "look Caesar in the face, after having lost an army he had committed
to my charge?" So saying, he continued fighting till he was slain. Very few
of the cavalry escaped, those only excepted who had stopped to refresh their
horses; for perceiving at a distance the rout of the whole army, they
returned to their camp. All the infantry were slain to a man.

[43] When this disaster was known, M. Rufus the questor, whom Curio had left to
guard the camp, entreated his men not to lose courage. They begged and
requested him to reconduct them into Sicily; which he promised, and ordered the
masters of the transports to have their ships in readiness at night along
the shore. But fear had so universally seized the minds of the soldiers,
that some cried out Juba was arrived with his troops; some
that Varus approached with the legions, the dust of whose march they
pretended to discern; and others, that the enemy's fleet would be upon them
in an instant; though there was not the least ground for these reports The
consternation thus becoming general, each man thought only of his own sailed
immediately, and their flight drew after it that of the transports; so that
only a very few small frigates obeyed the summons, and came to the general
rendezvous. The disorder was so great upon the shore, every one striving who
should first embark, that many boats sunk under the crowd, and others were
afraid to come near the land.

[44] Thus only a few soldiers and aged men, who either through interest or
compassion were received on board, or had strength enough to swim to the
transports, got safe to Sicily. The rest, deputing their
centurions to Varus by night, surrendered to him. Juba, coming up next day, claimed them as
his property, put the greater number to the sword, and sent a few of the
most considerable, whom he had selected for that purpose, into Numidia. Varus complained of this
violation of his faith; but durst not make any resistance. The king made his
entrance into the city on horseback, followed by a great number of senators,
among whom were Servius Sulpicius, and Licinius Damasippus. Here he stayed a
few days, to give what orders he thought necessary; and then returned, with
all his forces, into his kingdom.